---
ID: 646
post_title: 一周小结-20191229
author: chin340823
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://www.tvect.cn/archives/646
published: true
post_date: 2019-12-08 19:33:18
---
[toc]

Representation ??????

<h1>Conditional Independence and factorization</h1>

<h2>Directed Graph</h2>

begin with the factorized parameterization, subsequently motivate the conditional independence characterization

<ul>
<li>factorized parameterization</li>
</ul>

"local" parameterization:

<code>$p(x_1, ..., x_n) = \prod f(x_i, x_{\pi_i})$</code>

"local": <code>$ x_i, x_{\pi_i} $</code>

容易计算得到， <code>$f(x_i, x_{\pi_i}) = p(x_i | x_{\pi_i})$</code>

<ul>
<li>conditional independence</li>
</ul>

<strong>d-separation</strong>: directed separation

<strong>bayes ball algorithm</strong>:

<h2>Undirected Graph</h2>

start with a set of conditional independence axioms, subsequently driving the parameterization

<ul>
<li>conditional independence</li>
</ul>

X_A is independent of X_C given X_B if X_B separates the nodes X_A from the nodes X_C.

<strong>graph reachability algorithm</strong>

<ul>
<li>factorized parameterization</li>
</ul>

"local" parameterization

前面的 conditional independence 说明，两个不直接相连的节点，在给定其他所有节点的情况下是条件独立，所以在参数分解式中，他们不应该出现在同一个 factor （local function）中，因为我们选择的 local function 是任意的，无法保证同一个 local function 中的变量条件独立。

所以，local function 的定义域不应该超过 clique 的边界。

<code>$p(x) := \frac{1}{Z} \prod_{C} \phi_{x_C}(x_C) = \frac{1}{Z} \prod_C exp{-H_C(x_C)} = \frac{1}{Z} exp{-H(x)}$</code>

其中 <code>$\phi$</code> 是一个 非负，实值，除此之外任意的势函数。

<strong>normalization factor Z</strong>

<ol>
<li>Z is obtained by summing over all configurations x.</li>
</ol>

there are an exponential number of such configurations and it's unrealistic to try to perform such a sum by naively enumerating all of the summands.

Note, however the expression being summed over is a factored expression, in which each factor refers to a local set of variables, and thus we can exploit the distributive law. (refer to probabilistic inference in PGM)

<ol start="2">
<li>when we just want to calculate conditional probability, we do not necessarily have to calculate Z.</li>
</ol>

<strong>Hammersley-Clifford theorem</strong>

<h1>The Elimination Algorithm</h1>

<h2>Eliminate Algorithm for probabilistic inference on directed &amp; undirected graph</h2>

<strong>Eliminate Algorithm</strong>

<h2>Graph Elimination Algorithm</h2>

<h3>Graph Elimination and Undirected Graph</h3>

<strong>UndirectedGraphElimination</strong>

<ul>
<li>Relations</li>
</ul>

<strong>elimination cliques</strong> in <strong>UNDEIRECTEDGRAPHELIMINATION</strong> are the graph-theoretic counterparts of the set of variables on which summations operate in probabilistic inference using <strong>ELIMINATION</strong>

<ul>
<li>Compuational Complexity</li>
</ul>

the overall complexity of this algorithm is determined by the number of variables in the largest elimination clique.

(treewidth: one less than the smallest achieveable value of the cardinality of the largest elimination clique, where we range over all possible elimination orderings)

the general problem of finding the best elimination ordering of a graph - an elimination ordering that achieves the treewidth - turn out to be NP-hard.

<h3>Graph Elimination and Directed Graph</h3>

为了将 elimination cliques 的对应关系同样应用到 directed graph 中，需要先对有向图做 moralization 操作, 转化为一个 moral graph.

<strong>DirectedGraphElimination</strong>

Moralize -> Undirected Graph Elimination

<h2>后续演进</h2>

calculate the conditional probability of all of the non-evidence nodes in the graph ???

<ul>
<li>Sum-Product

allows the computation of all singleton marginals, but is restricted to trees.</p></li>
<li><p>Junction Tree

<p>computes marginals for general trees.</p></li>
</ul>

<h1>参考资料：</h1>

<ul>
<li><a href="">Jordan: An Introduction to PGMs</a> Chapter 2 &amp; Chapter 3</li>
</ul>