---
ID: 745
post_title: 小结-20200123
author: chin340823
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://www.tvect.cn/archives/745
published: true
post_date: 2020-01-23 20:05:20
---
这部分内容整理来源于 Jordan Book：An Introduction to PGMs，Chapter 12. Hidden Markov Models 和 Chapter 13. The Multivariate Gaussian.

第 12 章主要是介绍了 HMM（can be viewed as a "dynamical" mixture model), 包括其中 inference 问题和参数学习问题. 第 13 章主要是介绍了 多变量高斯分布的一些性质.

<h1>Hidden Markov Models</h1>

<h2>The graphical model</h2>

<h2>The parameterization</h2>

denote the state at time $t$ as $q_t$, and let $y_t$ represent the observable "output" at time $t$, then:

$$ p(q, y) = p(q_0) \prod_{t=0}^{T-1} p(q_{t+1}|q_{t}) \prod_{t=0}^T p(y_t | q_t)$$

<h2>The inference problem</h2>

<strong>filtering problem</strong>: calculation of $p(q_t | y_0, ... , y_t)$

<strong>prediction problem</strong>: calculation of $p(q_t | y_0, ... , y_s)$, where $t \gt s$

<strong>smoothing problem</strong>: calculation of $p(q_t | y_0, ... , y_u)$, where $t \lt u$

<h2>Inference</h2>

<strong>alpha-beta algorithm</strong>

$$ p(q_t | y) = \frac{p(y_0, ..., y_t, q_t) p(y_{t+1}, ..., y_T | q_t)}{p(y)} = \frac{\alpha(q_t)\beta(q_t)}{p(y)}$$

其中：$ \alpha(q_t) = p(y_0, ..., y_t, q_t) $, $\beta(q_t) = p(y_{t+1}, ..., y_T | q_t)$

$$
\begin{aligned}
\alpha(q_{t+1}) &amp;= \sum_{q_t} \alpha(q_t) a_{q_t, q_{t+1}} p(y_{t+1} | q_{t+1}) &#92;
\alpha(q_0) &amp;= p(y_0, q_0) = p(y_0|q_0) \pi_{q_0} &#92;
\beta(q_t) &amp;= \sum_{q_{t+1}} \beta(q_{t+1})a_{q_t, q_{t+1}} p(y_{t+1} | q_{t+1}) &#92;
\beta(q_T) &amp;= 1
\end{aligned}
$$

<h2>An alternative inference algorithm</h2>

<strong>alpha-gamma algorithm</strong>

$$\gamma(q_t) = p(q_t | y_1, ..., y_T) = \frac{\alpha(q_t) \beta(q_t)}{p(y)}$$

$$ \gamma(q_t) = \sum_{q_{t+1}} \frac{\alpha(q_t) a_{q_t, q_{t+1}}}{\sum_{q_t}\alpha(q_t)a_{q_t, q_{t+1}}} \gamma(q_{t+1})$$

this recursion makes use of the alpha variables, which therefore must be computed before the gamma recursion begins. The gamma recursion is initialized with $\gamma(q_T) = \alpha(q_T)$

Note that the data $y_t$ are not referenced in the gamma recursion; the alpha recursion has absorbed all of the necessary data likelihoods.

<h2>The $\xi(q_t; q_{t+1})$ variables</h2>

$\xi(q_t; q_{t+1}) = p(q_t, q_{t+1} | y)$

<ol>
<li><p>使用 $\alpha$, $\beta$ 来计算 $ \xi$:</p></li>
<li><p>使用 $\alpha$, $\gamma$ 来计算 $\xi$:</p></li>
</ol>

<h2>Numerical issues</h2>

<h2>Parameter estimation</h2>

<h3>EM algorithm</h3>

<h1>The Multivariate Gaussian</h1>

<h1>参考资料</h1>

<ul>
<li><p><a href="">Jordan book: PGM chapter 12. Hidden Markov Models</a></p></li>
<li><p><a href="">Jordan book: PGM chapter 13. The Multivariate Gaussian</a></p></li>
</ul>