---
ID: 706
post_title: 一周小结-20190118
author: chin340823
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://www.tvect.cn/archives/706
published: true
post_date: 2020-01-18 19:24:49
---
这部分内容整理来源于 Jordan Book：An Introduction to PGMs，Chapter08. The exponential family and generalized linear models

这里先是 exponential family distribution 的概念和性质，然后介绍了 GLIM，扩展了前面几章 linear regression &amp; linear classification 的内容.

<!--more-->

<h1>The exponential family</h1>

基本形式为: $ p(x|\eta) = h(x) \exp(\eta^T T(x) - A(\eta)) $

$ \eta $: natural parameter

$ T(x) $: sufficient statistic

$ h(x) $: base measure

$ A(\eta) $: log-normalizer

The set of $\eta$ for which this integral is finite is referred to as the natural parameter space.

<h2>Examples:</h2>

The Bernoulli distribution

The Poisson distribution

The Gaussian distribution

The multinomial distribution

<h2>Moments</h2>

in general the first derivative of  $A(\eta)$ is equal to the mean of $T(X)$: $ \frac {dA(\eta)} {d\eta} = E[T(X)] $

the second derivative of $A(\eta)$ is equal to the variance of the sufficient statistic $T(x)$: $ \frac {d^2A(\eta)} {d\eta^2} = Var [T(X)] $

<h2>The moment parameterization</h2>

the relation $ u = \frac{d A(\eta)}{d \eta} $ is invertible (Because the second derivative of $A(\eta)$ is a variance and hence positive).

This argument implies that a distribution in the exponential family can be parameterized not only by $\eta$ -- the canonical parameterization -- but also by $\mu$ -- the moment parameterization.

<h2>Sufficiency</h2>

Sufficiency characterizes what is essential in a data set, or, alternatively, what is inessential and can therefore be thrown away.

直观上理解，$T(x)$ is sufficient for $\theta$, 意味着: having observed $T (X)$, we can throw away $X$ for the purposes of inference with respect to $\theta$.

<ul>
<li><strong>Sufficiency in the Bayesian frameworks</strong>
We say that $T (X)$ is sufficient for $\theta$ if the following conditional independence statement holds: $ \theta \perp  X | T(X) $, i.e. $ p(\theta | T(x), x) = p(\theta | T(x))$</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Sufficiency in the frequentist frameworks</strong>
treating $\theta$ as a label rather than a random variable, we define $T (X)$ to be sufficient for $\theta$ if the conditional distribution of $X$ given $T (X)$ is not a function of $\theta$</p></li>
</ul>

<p>Both the Bayesian and frequentist definitions of sufficiency imply a factorization of $p(x | \theta)$: $ p(x|\theta) = g(T(x), \theta) h(x, T(x))$.

<h2>Maximum likelihood estimates</h2>

$$ \triangledown_{\eta} A(\hat{\eta}) = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{n=1}^N T(x_n) $$

defining $ \mu = E[T (x)] $, we obtain: $ \hat{\mu}<em>{ML}= \frac{1}{N} \sum</em>{n=1}^N T(x_n) $

This gives operational meaning to sufficiency -- for the purpose of estimating parameters we retain only the sufficient statistic.

<h2>Maximum likelihood and the Kullback-Leibler divergence</h2>

给定数据点 $x_1, ..., x_N$, 定义 empirical distribution 为: $\hat{p}(x) = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^N \delta(x, x_i)$.

<blockquote>
  minimizing the KL divergence to the empirical distribution is equivalent to maximizing the likelihood
</blockquote>

<h1>Generalized linear models</h1>

<strong>GLIM</strong>

A GLIM makes three assumptions regarding the form of the conditional probability distribution $p(y | x)$ :

<ul>
<li>The observed input $x$ is assumed to enter into the model via a linear combination $ \xi  = \theta^T x$,</p></li>
<li><p>The conditional mean $\mu$ is represented as a function $f (\xi)$ of the linear combination $\xi$, where $f$ is known as the response function,</p></li>
<li><p>The observed output $y$ is assumed to be characterized by an exponential family distribution with conditional mean $\mu$.</p></li>
</ul>

<p>There are two principal choice points in the specification of a GLIM:

<ol>
<li>the choice of exponential family distribution</li>
</ol>

这里假定 conditional distribution 的形式为 exponential dispersion family.

<blockquote>
  The choice of exponential family distribution is generally rather strongly constrained by the nature of the data Y . Thus, class labels are naturally represented by Bernoulli or multinomial distributions, counts by the Poisson distribution, intervals by the exponential or gamma distributions, et
</blockquote>

<ol start="2">
<li>the choice of the response function $f(.)$</li>
</ol>

因为 conditional expectation 取值等等限制，这里的 $f(.)$ 的选择也会有一些限制.

<strong>canonical response function</strong>

$f(.) = \psi^{-1}(.)$, 等价地有：$\eta = \xi$

the canonical response function is by no means the universally best choice for all problems.

The first point to note about the canonical response function is that it automatically passes a sanity check with regards to the constraints on its range.

<h2>Maximum likelihood estimation</h2>

<strong>on-line algorithm</strong>

<strong>batch algorithm</strong>

IRLS -> Fisher scoring method

<h1>其他</h1>

<h2>关于exponential family 几个概念/形式傻傻分不清</h2>

<strong>general exponential family</strong>

$$ p(x|\eta) = h(x) \exp(g(\eta)^T T(x) - A(\eta)) $$

<strong>natural exponential family</strong>

A NEF is an exponential family in which the natural parameter $g(η)$ and the natural statistic $T(x)$ are both the identity.

$$ p(x|\eta) = h(x) \exp(\eta^T x - A(\eta)) $$

<strong>exponential dispersion family</strong>

In probability and statistics, the class of exponential dispersion models (EDM) is a set of probability distributions that represents a generalisation of the natural exponential family.

There are two versions to formulate an exponential disperson model.

<ul>
<li>Additive exponential dispersion model</li>
</ul>

$$ p(x | \eta, \phi) = h(x, \phi) \exp[\eta^T x - \phi A(\eta)] $$

<ul>
<li>Reproductive exponential dispersion model</li>
</ul>

$$ p(x | \eta, \phi) = h(x, \phi) \exp[\frac{\eta^T x - A(\eta)}{\phi}] $$

其中，$\phi$ 称为 dispersion parameter. 对于一个特定的 $\phi$, 此即为一个 natural exponential family.

<h1>参考资料</h1>

<ul>
<li><p><a href="">Jordan book: PGM chapter 08</a></p></li>
<li><p><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_dispersion_model">wikipedia: Exponential dispersion model</a></p></li>
<li><p><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_exponential_family">wikipedia: Natural exponential family</a></p></li>
<li><p><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_family">wikipedia: Exponential family</a></p></li>
</ul>